The Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy presented by
the Perbian Basin Science Fiction Association.
This is David Cruz.
Daryl Lane and David Carson.
Today we're going to have a close encounter with the Center for UFO Studies.
I'm going to be talking with Dr. Richard Haynes, a vision researcher for NASA.
Dr. Haynes is also on the scientific board of the Center for UFO Studies and he has published
several books on ufology or the study of UFOs, two of which are the UFO Phenomenon and the
Behavioral Scientist and Observing UFOs and Investigators Handbook.
Dr. Haynes, what is the Center for UFO Studies and what does it do?
The Center is a non-profit organization made up of volunteers established in 1973 to provide
a place for people to come forward with their sightings without fear of publicity or ridicule.
What is your connection with the Center for UFO Studies?
Well, I'm a scientific board member for the Center and also one of the field investigators.
The Center has approximately 35 to 40 professionals in various fields of science and we are asked
then to consult on specific cases.
What type of psychological effect has it had on persons who've had a close encounter of
the third kind?
Well, Dave, there's really been a very broad range of responses so far.
A lot of people don't realize that there have been many hundreds of close encounters of
the third kind.
Some of them have been documented rather fully.
The kinds of psychological responses people have had have ranged anywhere from fear and
panic to a sense of peace and joy and well-being.
I would say in general that the individual personality type of the witness largely determines
the kind of response they're going to give.
How conditioned are they to a stress response, for instance?
Are they used to in their past experiences, social isolation or have they overcome ridicule
in the past?
All of these factors I think play an important role in how people will react in a CE3 case.
Is there any type of particular person that sees UFOs?
Well, based upon the research done at the Center for UFO Studies on what is known as
UFO CAT, which stands for UFO Catalog, it's a computerized listing of well over 100,000
sightings now.
We don't seem to be able to find any strong relationships between personality profiles
and frequency of sighting.
We do find, however, that people with more education tend to be more likely to believe
in UFOs.
So there is a tendency there in the belief structure of persons.
Is there some particular reason why a person with a higher education would tend to believe
in UFOs?
I don't know, but it's possible at least that in the process of becoming educated in our
universities and so far, that we're exposed to a broader range of ideas and we are somehow
exposed to more creative thinking.
And part of that creativity might be that life does in fact exist in the outer space.
In other words, planet Earth is nearly a boat of intelligent life.
And if that's true then, it would suggest that the more educated people are projecting
those teachings and education upon their belief structure.
I think that's a very weak connection I'm sure and it would be really difficult to prove
it.
That's just one possible explanation.
What type of work is being done on how to communicate if Earth makes contact with another
world?
Well, David, you phrased the question.
It implies that communication won't take place until contact has been made.
I think the opposite is really the case, that we would try to communicate in order to contact
intelligent life elsewhere.
I know of two general approaches to communication with possible extraterrestrial intelligence.
One of them has to do with radio astronomy and it's called SETI or Search for Extraterrestrial
Intelligence.
The other has to do with UFO content using visual means and I'd like to discuss each
one just very briefly.
The National Aeronautics Space Administration does have a small program called SETI and
in this program calculations are made and strategies are developed for aiming large
diameter radio telescopes into outer space in different directions trying to receive
a signal that might somehow indicate the presence of advanced intelligence out there.
And so we have to make certain assumptions in doing that.
Mankind does in order to make sense of the signals that do come back because those large
telescopes are very sensitive and they do receive all kinds of static and noise and
so forth.
And so when the computer processes that static and noise, it looks for patterns and particularly
patterns which might be intelligently produced like repeating patterns, like some coded signal,
like Morse code for instance, that would seem to have some intelligence back to it.
We do know that certain kinds of star types in outer space, let's call them radiation
sources, do have highly precise and repeatable patterns of frequency so that it isn't just
the repeatability which is important because natural sources as I'm saying that could produce
those.
I do know in the other realm of course talking about UFOs, I do know of an effort near Austin,
Texas of a ground site operated by a group called Project Starlight International and
you may have heard of those people Dave, they've set up a large diameter circle of lights,
flashed lights on the ground and then they have them sequenced so that they come on sequentially
around the diameter circumference of the circle and the organizers of that group believe that
this is one way to try to attract attention to UFOs.
Well this is just part of a larger effort to obtain objective data from the UFO that
might fly into the area being attracted by that light signal.
Did the Center for UFO Studies help Steven Spielberg with his movie Close Encounters
of the Third Kind?
Well Dave, the scientific director at the Center for UFO Studies, Dr. J. Allen Heineck
was a scientific consultant on that movie but I don't know whether or not the files
of cases at the Center were opened up for use in the movie or not.
Could you explain the differences between the different types of close encounters?
Yes, the close encounter of the first kind is defined as a UFO sighting which the object
or phenomenon seen is relatively near the eyewitness and by relatively near we mean
on the order of 0500 to 1000 feet.
Because of that distance then it's usually involving the craft or large object of some
angular size like if you hold your fist out at arm's length for instance and then look
at your fist the object could be like that large or even larger.
Now in a close encounter of the second kind you have about the same kind of distance away
from the witness. However the object or phenomenon does some physical changing to the atmosphere
or the ground. It might leave impressions in the ground for instance or it might break
full-range the tree branches as it comes down. It might leave radiation in the soil, it might
dehydrate the soil or mat down the grass.
Now those are both to be distinguished from a close encounter of the third kind of which
I think most of us are familiar with now from the movie. Those are again close encounters
in terms of distance but in this case the witness reports seeing a humanoid, one or more humanoid
associated with the craft.
Now these particular terms were developed some time ago by Dr. Heineck as a result of
his extensive UFO research over the years.
Do you do field investigations for the center?
Yes I do. I'm one of approximately 10 or so people in the San Francisco Bay Area.
What type of work do you do in a field investigation?
Well Dave it really depends on the nature of the sighting itself and each case is very
different. I've never found two that are alike actually. And so the approach that we
take would really depend on the number of witnesses, how far away it is, what kind of
case it is, let's say a close encounter of the second kind. We would have to go prepared
to take soil samples and radiation tests and residual magnetism tests and so forth.
So I can't give you a specific answer there. I would like to however give you some idea
of a case I'm working on right now which in high speed relates to an anomalous kind of
event and it involves a pilot. You may have read several years ago about a 20 year old
private pilot who's flying from Melbourne, Australia to a small island in the ocean south
of Australia called King Island. He was flying a Cessna 182 long range model by himself and
he took off before sundown and planned to land at King Island just approximately at
sundown. He was about six minutes flying time out over the ocean from Cape Otway to
when he reported by radio to the flight service at Melbourne that he saw some traffic, air
traffic at his approximate altitude which was about 4500 feet. Everything seemed normal
in terms of his engine operation and the weather was perfectly clear. This was his second
night flight and he was gaining instrument time for commercial light. Another reason he
was going down according to the data I've collected is to buy fish at King Island from
the fishermen there to bring back for a RAF officers party that we're going to have
shortly. So he had two reasons to be out that night. Well he comes back on the radio and
makes a request of Melbourne to find out if there are any airplanes in his vicinity because
he sees four bright, quite landing lights coming towards him and he assumes it's a military
plane. Well to make a long story short the tape record which has been transcribed and
then released to the public by the Department of Transport lasts for about 12 minutes and
has him describing a very strange phenomenon of flying objects outside his airplane which
he describes as being long and metallic with a green light on it which does a number of
things. It approaches him from different directions, it hovers on top of him, it orbits about him
on top and when a pilot down there says orbit it means a very tight circle or a bank, he
says it's vanity which means, I take that to mean that while he was looking at it it
just suddenly disappeared and then about a minute later it showed up far off in the distance
and came at him again. So what I can learn from this among other things is that he is
somehow the object of attention of this phenomenon. It is the single path in which case it might
be a military plane. I don't think it's a military plane. The evidence that I've been
able to collect from the boy's father, the boy's girlfriend, the instructors he had,
the impressed classes at Moraban Airport and a great deal of other information leads me
to believe that we do have here a very good candidate for a UFO sighting and I am now
actually writing a full length book on the subject to document all of the details which
are filling four notebooks now. It's an exciting case because at the end of the tape recording
transmission to the ground there's a 14 second long segment, a very strange sound. It's hard
to describe, I guess about the closest one to describe it is you take some empty cans
and put them inside a garbage can and then shake the garbage can and they occur, what
I've been able to determine is a random sequence in time and I'm in now of the process of trying
to duplicate the sounds by going flying in a Cessna 182 aircraft and to make sound effects
on board the plane and then transmit those to the ground and analyze the sounds with
a sound spectrograph and I also have a voice stress analyzer that I'll be able to look
at some other factors there. So that's one of a great number of cases which are most
interesting and that happens to be the one I'm studying right now. I know the answer
to this question would have to be theoretical but what type of large scale social ramifications
would there be with a first contact? Well I'm sure that many people have speculated about
that including science fiction authors and I'm an average reader of science fiction myself.
I think it's a field for great creativity. Let me try to approach the question from a
number of points of view. First of all I think that mankind is likely to go through various
stages of response. The first being shock and disbelief. Second perhaps being a form
of mobilization into either a fight or flight response and then later on later stages would
probably be more intellectual where the Academy of Sciences of America and the Soviet Union
would probably debate the issue and so forth. So we go from more an emotional response to
depending on the nature of the first contact that's of course the key issue here. How mankind
and how the individual man on the street would perceive the visitors. Do they come in peace?
What are their intentions? Do they intend the harm? And depending on how we perceive their
exposure to us would largely I think determine the individual and corporate response. Now
if they came in mass with battalions of UFOs let's say or large battle wagons all off
Star Wars I think the response of mankind would be quite different than if they came
in small groups let's say a group of three vehicles to every capital of every nation
on the planet. I think that on another level looking at this from another point of view
the social ramifications of a first contact would be to force us to rethink our priorities
in life. Is territoriality for instance a really a high priority or not? It would force
us to take a new look at our independence or interdependency person to person. I think
it would force us to take a new look at what I would call our scheme of life or our hierarchies.
What's important to the individual here? I think in that realm it probably would force
each individual to perhaps come to terms with himself as not being the supreme creation
that some people think they are. In other words not making gods out of individuals. I
think that's our concept of what is the universe and perhaps even our definition of what is
infinity. And I think perhaps it would begin to force us to look at this boundary between
interspace and outer space. This real surreal dimension that philosophers like to talk about.
I think that such an impact would contribute, I'm sorry not impact but first contact might
well contribute to our increased knowledge of ourselves and how fragile we are as individuals,
both socially and psychologically. You see because of an impact in contact would challenge
some long held beliefs that have been around for thousands of years. Another dimension,
another way of talking about first contact might be to force us to think well maybe we
now have an opportunity to leave planet earth for other realms or other planets or other
worlds. Do I really want to leave the planet? Our space program is opening up this potential
with a space shuttle of course that will allow us to take reasonably large numbers of people
into orbit for a while up to a week at a time to begin with. So entering our psyche now on
planet earth is this ability to leave if we want to. But we don't see long lines of people
queuing up to leave. So with that realization we're no longer prisoners of the planet but
in fact we find that we like the planet earth. It's the birthplace of life that we know of
and we have no reason to leave. So what's the outcome of that but to realize it's a very
fragile ecosphere, a closed environment and it's protecting us. So we better watch out
what we do with the ionosphere for instance from solar ultraviolet. I think that these
are all different ways that I would think of what might happen on a first contact. I'm
sure that's a good question. But those are kind of organizing concepts that I use to
think about first contact. Which I do by the way. Anyone that works in ufology has to take
first contact very seriously and have some strategy or scenario worked out what you do.
Do you think science fiction would have any value in helping prepare persons for first contact?
Well again that's one of those questions I would have to answer yes and no. For those
kinds of personality types that go to science fiction movies that are impressionable or
let's say they have a great need to be stable in their environment and the response of the
environment I would say that science fiction probably doesn't affect them as much as it
would a kind of personality that has a greater need to be dynamic. To think creatively. To
expose themselves to rather diverse kinds of experiences. And there are those differences
of personality in the culture of course. So science fiction movies that I've seen have
been largely opening up new vistas as what might exist. So whether or not I want to accept
the impact on myself or not as seeing science fiction movies is really not the issue. Because
very deep in my subconscious I believe is the exposure I've had to every science fiction
movie in the past as well as everything else I've been exposed to in the past. So let me
illustrate this with a practical example. For many years now I have been administering
UFO drawing tests to people and in this test I give them a 5 by 7 inch white card and I ask
them to write their age, occupation, whether or not they're male or female, whether or not
they're male or female. And they'll circle the answer yes or no or a question mark if they're
not sure. Then I have them turn the card over and draw a picture of what they think a UFO
looks like. Well I've been doing this for many years and I have collected about a thousand
drawings now from many cultures, many continents, many age groups, and occupation. What I find
is the drawings made by people who claim to have seen a UFO are virtually no different
than the drawings by people who have never seen one. Now what that says is that perhaps
everybody has seen one, but not a real one rather than a media representation of a UFO.
And to me as a psychologist I find that rather interesting data than you think about. Obviously
it's a rather small sample size and I am continuing to collect drawings to see if there are some
more subtle effects beginning to emerge. I have postulated that with a larger sample size
I will see the difference. Is there any particular area of the country or any particular time
of year where sightings are more predominant? Yes, as a matter of fact there is Dave. Based
upon a statistical analysis from a UFO cat of approximately 65,000 cases at the time
the study was done we find that California, the Central American states, Illinois, Indiana,
Ohio, and also the North Eastern region of America, continental America, tend to have
higher close counters of the first, second, third time. But we've also found some other
interesting patterns that are starting to emerge that July tends to be the month of the year
where the greatest number of sightings are obtained, reports are turned in I would say,
and also we've found that there is more likely to be a UFO sighting between 10 p.m. and midnight
than any other time of the day. And in some work that I've done on airline pilots I've found
that there are two times to the day that are more likely than others for them to see a UFO.
The same as before that's about 10 p.m. to midnight is the first peak of sighting frequency.
But there's an interesting second peak for pilots between 2 and 3 a.m. in the morning.
And so obviously this is not a finding which is related to the number of airplanes flying.
I think it might have something more to do with the visibility conditions at night.
Obviously if your eyes are dark adapted to the nighttime conditions and you are outdoors
you're more likely to see a light in the sky obviously than during the daytime when that
same light in the sky would be masked by the background brightness.
So we have found some rather interesting patterns in the statistical analysis of the data
but clearly we need more data to really be more sure of the finding.
Could you tell us a little bit about some of the difficulties encountered in studying UFOs?
One of the fundamental tenets of scientific research is that we're able to control the conditions
in such a way that we can make sense out of the stimulus and then the subsequent response.
Unfortunately we're not able to do that in studies of UFOs because we cannot predict when
and where they're going to occur with any reliability.
Now because they do occur unexpectedly in time and space I think there's an important lesson there
because it means that none of us know whether or not we're going to be an eyewitness.
Now since that is true I think it behooves all of us to know what to do if we should become an eyewitness.
And so I'd like to just mention briefly that the Center for UFO Studies in Evanston, Illinois
has a telephone number which is operated 24 hours a day and we encourage people with sightings
to call that number and to give the details to the person who answers.
After a person has done that they may be contacted by a field investigator such as myself for further information.
So let me give you that phone number at the Center for UFO Studies in Illinois.
The phone number is area code 312-491-6666.
If a person's interested in ufology and wants to find out more about what the Center for UFO Studies does
can they write them and get some more information?
Yes they certainly can. I would urge them to write the Center for UFO Studies at 1609 Sherman Avenue, Suite 207.
And that's Evanston, Illinois, 60201.
Anyone who does write to the Center should ask for a list of publications of the Center.
Remember if you see something that you believe to be a UFO you can call the Center for UFO Studies at 312-491-6666.
Or you can write to them at the Center for UFO Studies, 1609 Sherman Avenue, Suite 207,
Evanston, Illinois, 60201.
This is David Cruz.
Darrell Lane.
And David Carson.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a presentation of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association
in conjunction with KOCB FM and Odessa College, Odessa, Texas.